On May 13 - 23, 1996 Tom Rothrock and Margaret Andraka visited four Central 
European countries (Hungary, Slovakia, Austria, and the Czech Republic) to present 
Client/Server BAMS, HighEst, EBS, FieldBook, and Cloverleaf as possible products and 
services these countries might be interested in.  

In November, 1994, eleven Central European countries joined together to form HEEP 
Area V in order to facilitate communications among themselves and with the United 
States on issues related to introducing computerized solutions to meet their engineering 
and information management needs associated with infrastructure rebuilding (the TEM 
project).  Info Tech attended the inaugural meeting and presented information about 
BAMS.  Attendance at this year’s HEEP V meeting and the accompanying tour is a result 
of our continued contact with  TEM and HEEP V officials and their interest in pursuing 
software solutions for construction management that the TEM countries can share.  
Because of our work with AASHTO in creating a system used by so many states, they 
would like us to propose a similar solution for the TEM countries.  The primary purpose 
of our visit was to familiarize them with the product we have developed and to 
familiarize us with their requirements.

Arrival of conference participants
We arrived in the afternoon and were greeted by Peter Barek, his driver, and Stanislaw 
Kijowski (our driver).  It took us several hours before we found our hotel and settled 
down.

Setting up all laptops, printer, projector, and the network for the first time took us about 
45 minutes.  Everything worked fine except for the search capabilities of Cloverleaf and 
invocation of EBS from Cloverleaf.  Cloverleaf was not set up to show the bidding 
application, which turned out to be the area of greatest interest.

Peter Barek opened the HEEP Area V conference, presented the goals of the meeting and 
the Trans European Motorway (TEM) project.  He presented his vision for introducing 
and using in the participating countries common software for managing construction and 
other activities.  He encouraged the participants to take this perspective when evaluating 
the products Info Tech would present.  

We met with the representatives from Bulgaria, Slovakia, and Poland.  During the 
individual discussions it became apparent that these countries not only do not have  
specialized systems for managing the pre-construction and construction activities but also 
view the idea of promoting common software among the TEM members as a good one.  
The Bulgarian representatives were very supportive and spoke with Peter Barek about it 
at length.  Representatives from Slovakia and Poland also agree with this strategy.  From 
discussions with these representatives we found that their bidding support and 
management is very primitive while systems for supporting other pre-construction and 
construction activities are practically nonexistent.  They do archive their data periodically 
but there is no on-line access, and thus the historical data is mostly not utilized for 
decision support.

Our presentation lasted 1.5 hour.  It consisted of a slide presentation and product 
demonstrations.  It went quite well and provided just the right amount of information 
overview and application examples.  Tom showed Cloverleaf, EBS, Client/Server 
BAMS, and FieldBook systems.

The area of bid letting support triggered discussion.  There was also interest in FieldBook 
and Client/Server BAMS.  We have distributed the marketing materials and also received 
requests for additional FieldBook and EBS manuals.  The issues raised included the 
differences among countries in rules for awarding contracts and prequalifying contractors.  
Since several of these countries are in the process of joining the European Union (EU), 
the issue of meeting EU standards and requirements was also discussed and determined to 
be and important consideration in software adoption.

Each country presented a report on progress since the last HEEP meeting.  Some of the 
countries also provided an overview of their product and technology development from 
the initial efforts in 1960’s to present time.  One of the more interesting reports was by 
the Hungarian Research University.  In this report we heard how isolation of the 
computer scientists from the civil engineers lead to and estimated loss of about 10 years, 
huge cost, and creation of systems that do not find application now.  The Polish group 
presented their Pavement Management System (PMS) as well as the situation of the road 
network development in Poland. We have a copy of this report available. The Czech 
group presented their CAD system along with example designs.  

The welcome party was attended by all participants, and we met with several countries.  
In particular we had further discussions with Hungarians, Slovakian, and Polish 
representatives.  Dr. Katalina Tanczos from the Technical University of Budapest 
expressed considerable interest in our products and is very active in the international 
circles and collaborates on several research projects with people from England, France, 
and Italy.  She represents the Department of Transport Economics and is interested to 
stay in contact with us.

Peter Barek met with us later in the day  to discuss the details of the tour in the adjacent 
countries.  We finalized the schedule, discussed background of the expected audience in 
each country, and reviewed other upcoming meetings.   Peter presented us with his vision 
for promoting our products at the TEM level.  The primary need right now is for a 
bidding system while other systems are of interest as well.  He plans to contact the 
representatives of the countries after our tour to follow up on this idea and get 
recommendations. At a TEM planning meeting in July, Peter plans to present a 
proposition to involve a couple of European countries in a pilot project where some 
components of BAMS (or system like BAMS provided by Info Tech outside AASHTO) 
would be used in the transportation ministries.  By mid-July, Peter needs a letter from 
Info Tech summarizing software that we offer for bid letting support. 

Peter is in favor of working directly with us to promote an Info Tech owned suite of 
products which would provide functionality similar to BAMS and its related systems.  
We also discussed training and implementation procedures that Info Tech provides for 
new states.  Peter also stated that the TEM project budget is good for this year.  If there is 
enough interest, we need to research the differences between the rules and standards that 
we apply in our software and those applied in Europe.  So far it looks like, for example, 
the bidding procedures are practically identical..

The remaining countries presented their reports.  Hungarians also presented a report on 
the environmental studies with relation to road design and development.  Examples of 
building special tunnels for animals were presented.  The group from Turkey presented 
their work in the area of design and GIS (they use Intergraph products), pavement 
management, and budget planning.  There also was a video presentation by Gerry 
Gingras about AGA’s (Alan Ackman’s Tampa-based company, an AASHTOWare 
vendor) products (CAiSE).   We also saw that each of the participating countries is 
looking for or building its own Pavement Management System.  We may need to 
consider researching this area as well for possible future development.  

We held several discussions with the representatives of the Polish Ministry of 
Transportation. There are 170 district road administrations (DOTs) employing about 1000 
government employees.  There are about 10,000 workers on the roads.  We discussed 
their current contract management, archiving, bidding, and decision support procedures 
and methods.  Polish road administration manages data in a data bank they developed on 
HP 9000 machines under UNIX.  They are planning to move to a larger relational 
database management system. There is a significant problem with correctness and 
integrity of data they collect in the central office.  There is no contract management 
system in place.  They are now planning for building a system that would perform 
functions similar to what BAMS supports.  The bidding procedures are almost  identical 
to those followed in the US.  There is no computerized bidding support and management 
system as yet with the exception of MS Excel spreadsheets used  for recording bids.  The 
volume of work is going to go up in the upcoming years.  Data is periodically archived 
and if analysis of data is needed, it is restored.  Due to tedious steps involved in this 
process, analysis of historical data is often skipped during the decision making process.  
The representatives we met were from the group responsible for the PMS development 
and application. They also showed interest in our products and took materials for their 
colleagues.  In July,   Margaret is scheduled to visit both Peter Barek and the contacts 
from the Polish Ministry of Transportation in Warsaw, Poland while she is there on 
vacation.

We met with the representative from Sweden.  They have just gone through a 
reorganization and plan to develop a system for contract management.  He stated that 
system like BAMS is what they need and what they are planning to develop.

Travel in Budapest for the first time where a map is your only guide is difficult as there 
are practically no signs on the roads.  We had to drive into streets, check on the houses 
for the road names and decide if we are in the right place.  Additionally, roads there tend 
to fork off in various directions and change names.   

We left the HEEP V conference on May 16th after lunch.  This trip is probably most 
memorable because it took us 10 hours instead of the expected 3 hours to get to 
Bratislava due to some confusion at the boarder regarding the computers.  We had to go 
back to the Budapest airport customs for some certifications of what we had brought into 
the country.  On the second attempt (at 2:00 a.m.), we crossed the Slovak boarder without 
a problem but were stopped several times by the local police both in Budapest and 
Bratislava since we were traveling very late at night.

Our presentation went very well, and all software worked fine.  It generated a lot of 
interest in the area of bid letting support and management.  There were several questions 
regarding the bid letting procedures in the USA as well as contract management and 
provisions for inflation.  Another area of high interest was the decision support system.  
We presented example graphs from the BAMS SO&SO document for the commonly 
used analysis models.  Current plans in Slovak Republic call for building about 400 km 
of  motorway  within the next 5 years.  This will result in a large management effort.  
Security and supported areas of customization were also discussed - specifically screen 
label and report customizations.

Our presentation audience was a mixture of high level managers, highway engineers, and 
contractors.  We received several requests for additional FieldBook manuals and EBS 
manuals as well as demo diskettes.  We were approached by one of the chief engineers 
who stated that the systems we present should be promoted at a higher level for common 
use in the TEM project.  He and Mr. Hantak were going to express this interest to Peter 
Barek.  After the presentation we held a closing meeting with Mr. Hantak and discussed 
the possibility of providing him with a Cloverleaf account and access to information 
managed on this Intranet.

We moved to Vienna over the weekend and spent most of the day looking for a hotel.  
Practically everything was booked due to a music festival taking place in Vienna.  
Driving in Vienna is also complex due to a dense network of one way streets.

Our presentation went quite well.  The audience was composed mainly  of high level 
officials and chief engineers. Since Austria belongs to the European Union, their 
perspective is that whatever they adopt should not only adhere to EU standards but also 
be easily accessible by the member countries.  The concept of Intranet and its practical 
use under Cloverleaf was in particular attractive to them.  They recognize that a system 
like that would be instrumental in giving prospective contractors from all EU countries 
access to proposal documents electronically.

We had lunch with one of the attorneys participating in the meeting.  We discussed issues 
that EU is now facing with establishing standards and having countries follow them.  
Their goal is to develop or adopt by the year 2000 software like BAMS for common use 
at the EU level.  They are evaluating systems from Europe right now.  


The meeting was held in the Prgoproject company which works as a consultant for the 
Czech Ministry of Transportation.   Our presentation was attended by project engineers, 
Pragoproject employees, and representatives from the road administration in the 
transportation ministry.  There was a fair amount of discussion about bid letting 
management, different bidder pre-qualification laws that countries apply, and capabilities 
of our decision support component, especially pricing analysis.  We presented example 
analysis models using the BAMS SO&SO document.  Support for screen and report 
customization along with the benefits of the generic fields in BAMS were discussed as 
well. It was suggested that we translate our product brochures to Czech and Polish.   Peter 
Pospisil is willing to help in deriving  Czech versions from Polish versions.  We also got 
requests for additional EBS and BAMS SO&SO documents.

The presentation went well and generated the most interest in the area of bid letting 
management and decision support. We addressed questions and issues related to 
flexibility of software, bidding procedures, and decision support . We presented example 
analysis models using the BAMS SO&SO document.  Support for screen and report 
customization along with the benefits of the generic fields in BAMS was discussed as 
well Currently, Novel networks are in place in Brno ministry.  They are moving towards 
Windows NT as the standard platform.  MS Excel is used for bid management support in 
conjunction with MS Access.  They are going to decide this Summer on moving to a 
large database management system, possibly Oracle.  They are also familiar with the 
Internet.  We discussed plans for providing a Cloverleaf account and demo versions of 
software by the end of the Summer.  
 
We were amazed by how similar the bidding procedures are to the procedures in the 
United States.  PES/LAS/EBS could probably work with little modification.  They even 
have an inflation adjustment for payments procedure similar to what we have in CAS.

We were most surprised by the interest in DSS reports.  Upon reflection it is apparent that 
they do not have databases in place that could generate these types of analyses.  They 
asked specific questions about how we would identify a price outlier and what US 
procedures were for dealing with unbalanced bidding.  They set floors and ceilings on 
prices for certain items.

The people we met with were very friendly and genuinely interested in what we had to 
present.  It was sometimes a challenge to communicate effectively with the language 
barrier.  Three of the presentations were translated as they were given.  It slowed things 
down quite a bit and kept the focus on the essentials.

Traveling turned out to be a greater challenge than expected.   Margaret did an 
outstanding job of navigating, but her stress levels were very high by the time we finally 
reached our destinations.  

Peter Barek appears to be a strong advocate of  working with us to implement software in 
these countries.  He is well respected in each country that we visited and is in a good 
position to help make it happen.  We need to follow-up and stay in contact with the key 
people in each country.  Cloverleaf may be a good way of doing this.  We should provide 
Cloverleaf access to Peter Barek and other key people from each country as a tool to help 
us keep in touch and expose them to what we are doing in the U.S.

In order to maintain our momentum and develop client relations abroad, we need to 
follow up on a periodic basis with Peter Barek and each of the countries we visited.  We 
will draft thank you letters to our primary contacts in each country and send the 
additional marketing brochures and sample manuals we got requests for.  We plan to 
provide demo versions of Info Tech software by the end of the Summer.  Margaret is 
scheduled to visit Peter Barek and Polish Transportation Ministry in July while she is in 
Poland on vacation with her family.

Develop an Info Tech owned suite of integrated systems that provide a total solution for 
support of all phases of contract life cycle. The long term goal is building a next 
generation system that will benefit from our extensive experience in software 
development for highway agencies, our existing GUI and client/server middleware 
systems, and expertise in the advanced technologies. This line of products will follow two 
phases of development where the first version focuses on integrating existing Info Tech 
systems and creating missing components while the second phase will provide a complete 
solution in a compact system which has a uniform user interface and behavior across 
modules, integrates data in an enterprise wide database, and provides the core 
functionality at a lower cost to cities, counties, and other countries.
Recommended schedule for the initial effort:
Perform architecture and main component analysis by mid-July.
Discuss with Peter Barek in July solutions  Info Tech can offer.
Design of the main modules and crate initial prototype by the end of the year.

The key to enhancing our chances in this new market is to maintain our presence, 
providing cutting edge solutions, and maintaining our prestige as experts in the field.  We 
want to provide each contact, especially Peter Barek with a Cloverleaf account and 
installation diskettes.  This way they can experience the benefits of the DOT Intranet and 
get exposure to many products and tools we provide.  The next step is to provide the 
demo versions of our software on Cloverleaf and post proceedings from this year’s HEEP 
Area V meeting.

We did not leave any demo diskettes in Europe but would like to provide them in couple 
of months to several interested personnel in visited countries.  We need to create 
exportable versions which will not cause us any legal problems and which can not be 
used as production software.

We need to send additional brochures and sample manuals to several people we met at 
the conference and during the tour. 

We should translate brochures for the key products to Czech, and German, and Polish to 
target a wider audience.  We received this recommendation several times.

Recognized as a powerful tool and direction, this capability was well received at our 
presentations.  Several areas that may still be improved include:
Enhancing presentation of the parameter data entry and search screens
Expanding with additional graphical representations for data analysis
Refining the line item profile capabilities
Researching other Web to BAMS capabilities

We need to research the European Union standards for software development and 
determine the areas in which our software does not comply with the standards.  Vienna 
representatives recommended we work with the office in Washington, DC. first.

The software and hardware configured for this trip worked very well.  We need to keep 
all the hard disks we set up, especially for Client/Server BAMS software as well as the 
demo database and reports.  Our portable multi-tier client/server networked setup was 
very impressive to participants at all places we presented.  This setup could be very useful 
on other trips.

We need assistance from the administrative staff with organizing folders with information 
we collected from the trip (maps, hotels, names, addresses/telephones/faxes, materials to 
be sent, etc.).

